{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## <$Title>\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
There is a danger of using mathematics to give the\
veneer of objectivity to an argument that is riddled with random\
guesses, ill-defined concepts, and unsupported premises. In this section, we analyze some statements made in a podcast debate between theist Calum Miller and atheist James Crofta, expressed as probability statements\\cite\{Brierley:2014ab\}.\
\
\\subsection\{The Argument\}\\label\{the-argument\}\
\
\\ppquote\{I think one useful way of thinking about is to consider\
what evidence is in general. When we think about evidence for a theory,\
in this case the theory is that God exists - we want to explain some\
features of the world, we look for things (observations) which are\
surprising if the theory isn't true but which aren't that surprising if\
the theory is true.\}\{Calum Miller\}\
\
Calum Miller then goes on to do an analogy with fingerprints on a murder\\TODO\{include?\}\
weapon, as features of the world. He then points out the observation what he believes is evidence for God.\
\
\\ppquote\{There are a number of arguments that work this way. But one of\
the particular pieces of evidence that we want to discuss today is that\
the world exhibits a real kind of regularity and there are basic laws,\
science works, that we can understand the world. For all we know, the\
universe could have been chaotic, might not have been any laws at all,\
we might not have been able to do science - it might have been complete\
chaos.\}\{Calum Miller\}\
\\TODO\{explain his quotes\}\
\
Here he's describing the form of the argument, as it might apply to the\
sun rising.\
\
\\ppquote\{Even more basic things that we use scientific reasoning for,\
but do not always strike us as scientific truth. For example, \\emph\{`the\
sun will rise tomorrow'\}. Most of us believe that; this is a\
common-sense inference from our observations. On atheism there is no reason to expect that regularity, because the sun could just fail to rise tomorrow.  On theism we can expect that kind of regularity because God set it in place\}\{Calum Miller\}\
\
Calum Miller finishes by describing further how moral responsibility hinges on this regularity, because we need to know the likely effect of my actions on others in order to make moral decisions and be responsible for them. If things were chaotic, if my actions had random effects, then moral responsibility could not work.\
\
\\subsection\{The problem with the math - posteriors vs\
likelihoods\}\\label\{the-problem-with-the-math---posteriors-vs-likelihoods\}\
\
The first problem with Miller's argument, from a math point of view, is that he is simply comparing \{\\em part\} of Bayes' rule (i.e the likelihoods, or how well the explanation fits the data) without looking at the rest of Bayes' rule (i.e. how likely, a-priori, those explanations are).  He compares the terms\
\
\\begin\{eqnarray*\}\
\\frac\{P(\{\\rm data\}|\{\\rm theism\})\}\{P(\{\\rm data\}|\{\\rm atheism\})\}\
\\end\{eqnarray*\}\
\
and says that this is greater than one, and thus theism is more\
likely. That is just the wrong question to ask. What we really want to\
look at, even keeping the same structure, is the ratio of the\
\\emph\{posterior\} probabilities, or\
\
\\begin\{eqnarray*\}\
\\frac\{P(\{\\rm theism\}|\{\\rm data\})\}\{P(\{\\rm atheism\}|\{\\rm data\})\}\
\\end\{eqnarray*\}\
\
which is related to the likelihood ratio through Bayes' rule:\
\
\\begin\{eqnarray*\}\
\\frac\{P(\{\\rm theism\}|\{\\rm data\})\}\{P(\{\\rm atheism\}|\{\\rm data\})\} &=& \\frac\{P(\{\\rm data\}|\{\\rm theism\})\}\{P(\{\\rm data\}|\{\\rm atheism\})\} \\times \\frac\{P(\{\\rm theism\})\}\{P(\{\\rm atheism\})\}\
\\end\{eqnarray*\}\
where we factor in the \\emph\{prior\} probabilities. Already, we have an\
issue, because the prior probability for the universe with an extra\
agent should be smaller than one without such an agent\\footnote\{Recall this as a consequence of the Conjunction rule above.\}. If you factor in\
the agent with many specific properties, then this is smaller still.\
By omitting this part, you could argue for anything. For example,\
\
\\begin\{eqnarray*\}\
\\frac\{P(\{\\rm data\}|\{\\rm fairies\})\}\{P(\{\\rm data\}|\{\\rm no-fairies\})\}>1\
\\end\{eqnarray*\}\
or, in other words, the regularity of the universe is much more likely given fairies than no-fairies, so that is evidence for the fairies. Even if true, it is clearly an uninteresting and not a useful claim.\
\
\\subsection\{The problem with the premise regarding\
theism\}\\label\{the-problem-with-the-premise-regarding-theism\}\
\
The next problem is that it seems that Calum Miller is  trying\
to sneak in many more details into his theism than his argument would\
warrant. He needs to \\emph\{define\} what he means by theism to state that\
it is more likely to result in a regular universe. This is where the mathematics forces one to be specific and thorough, and thus highlights problems in arguments that may seem fine at their face.\
\
For example, a number of counter examples can be made:\
\
\\begin\{itemize\}\
\\item  Under the Greek pantheon, it is more likely that things \{\\em would be chaotic\}, at the will of capricious deities - thus $P(\{\\rm data\}|\{\\rm theism\})$ would be lower than Calum Miller claims\
\\item  Gods or divine beings, such as Cthulhu, revel in chaos and thus would make it even less likely to result in a regular universe\
\\end\{itemize\}\
\
So when Calum Miller says ``theism'', what he seems to mean is the existence of ``order-making God(s)'', but then his argument is circular: a regular universe is more likely under a regular-universe-making God hypothesis than not.\
\
\\subsection\{The problem with the premise regarding\
atheism\}\\label\{the-problem-with-the-premise-regarding-atheism\}\
\
Further, Calum Miller never supports that it is unlikely to have an ordered universe under atheism. ``For all\
we know, the universe could be chaotic'', Calum says. However, that\
needs to be \\emph\{demonstrated\}, not asserted, or it is an argument from\
ignorance in disguise. It is possible, and in fact cosmology seems to be\
pointing more in this direction, that the universe could not be any\
other way - that the regularity is the result of the production of any\
universe, and further that the production of universes is the only\
stable solution. The notion of philosophical ``nothing'' may not be\
physically realizable - it may be impossible for ``nothing'' to exist.\\marginnote\{Yes, I realize the verbal tangles one gets into with using the word ``nothing'' in the same sentence as ``exists''.  Unfortunately, I doubt English can do much better here.\}\
\
\
Calum Miller's introduction of morality to the argument adds nothing,\
and only serves as a red herring. Without some regularity in the\
universe, even thought itself would be impossible . We couldn't even\
have the idea of a ``being'', or an animal, or life without regularity.\
Thus, our mere existence requires regularity - but one that need not be\
imposed from the outside, with a God. \
\
So, in summary, introducing the notion of a generic theism causes more problems to the argument than it solves, because it includes Zeus and Cthulhu. Circularity results when restricting the relevant theism to exclude these possibilities. Even if Calum Miller solved this, he is still answering the wrong question by ignoring the prior probabilities, and is at best achieving an uninteresting and useless result.\
\
\
\
}