{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## <$Title>\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
We see the same structure occurring in an ``\{\\em Unbelievable\}'' podcast\\cite\{Brierley:2014aa\} between theist Tim McGrew and  Peter Boghossian.  Because they were not thinking in terms of the framework presented here, they talked past each other through most of the episode.  In this discussion, Boghossian insists that faith is ``belief without evidence'' or ``pretending\
to know things you do not know'', and Tim McGrew insists that faith is more like trust.  The discussion then devolved into a back and forth with both sides claiming that ``all the people I know use my definition'', and was generally unproductive.  It is clear, however, that in the expected utility equation,\
\\beqn\
\\langle U_\{\\mbox\{action $A$\}\} \\rangle &=& \\P\{outcome 1\}\\times U(\\mbox\{outcome 1\}|\\mbox\{action $A$\}) + \\\\\
&&\\P\{outcome 2\}\\times U(\\mbox\{outcome 2\}|\\mbox\{action $A$\}) + \\\\\
&&\\vdots\
\\eeqn\
Boghossian is focusing on the probabilities ($\\P\{outcome 1\}$, $\\P\{outcome 2\}$, etc...) and McGrew is focussing on the utilities ($U(\\mbox\{outcome 1\}|\\mbox\{action $A$\})$, $U(\\mbox\{outcome 2\}|\\mbox\{action $A$\})$, etc...)  \
\
\\subsection\{The Discussion\}\
\
McGrew says that very few Christians (less than 1\\%) would use Boghossian's definition of faith, ``pretending to know things you do not know''.  We agree that no Christian would \\emph\{articulate\} this definition of\
faith, however they may be \\emph\{functionally\} using it, which we will\
address later.\
\
McGrew opens with \
\\pquote\{Faith is trusting in, holding to, and acting on what one has\
good reason to believe is true in the face of difficulties. The\
difficulties may be where you have to take an action where the outcome\
is beyond your control.\}\
\
The example he gives is jumping out of an airplane, where one has\
faith in ones instructor to have packed your parachute properly. Ones\
act of jumping draws the distinction between faith and \{\\em hope\} (if you just \{\\em hoped\} your instructor packed it, you wouldn't jump), and the decision is made in the face of evidence, not despite it or without it.\
\
Boghossian's general strategy is to ask a series of questions, to try to highlight the critical points.  For example, we get the following exchange:\
\\bi\
\\i Boghossian: \{\\em ``what do people mean when they accuse someone of having\
`faith in evolution' ''\}?\
\\i McGrew: \{\\em ``You're trusting in something that you cannot completely verify because it doesn't lie open to your senses.''\}\
\\i Boghossian: \{\\em ``what do people mean when they say `I don't have enough\
faith to be an atheist' ''\}?\
\\i McGrew: \{\\em ``They have belief in something in the face of certain difficulties, where the weight of the difficulties is greater on one side compared to the other.''\}\
\\i Boghossian: \{\\em ``Why don't we say that we have faith in the\
existence of chickens?''\}\
\\i McGrew:  \{\\em ``We are venturing nothing on the existence of chickens. When I believe that chickens exist and I act on that belief I am not taking any step that places outcomes I care about beyond my direct control. [In the case of religion], people are placing the outcome of their eternal soul out of their control. They are taking a risk where the outcomes matter. The decision itself is evidenced but the outcome is\
uncertain.''\}\
\\i Boghossian: \{\\em ``Do you have faith or evidence that Islam is\
false?''\}\
\\i McGrew: \{\\em ``Why would I use the word `faith' when I am venturing nothing on Islam?\
I am a little bit confused about the framing of the question that way. I\
think I have evidence that it is false, but since I am not venturing on\
Islam, I'm not sure why the word faith would come in.''\}\
\\ei\
\
\
\\subsection\{Addressing the Definitions\}\\label\{addressing-the-definitions\}\
\
Clearly claims using expected utility require that probability\
assignments have already been made, so claims of utility must\
necessarily be probability claims as well. When translated into these\
more precise terms, both McGrew's and Boghossian's claims begin to make more\
sense. It will also show that McGrew is in fact using the Boghossian's definition, in\
some cases even while denying it.\
\
\\begin\{quote\}\
You have faith that your instructor packed your parachute, as opposed to Peter packing it.  Your act of jumping makes faith more than simply hope (if you just hoped your instructor packed it, you wouldn't jump), and the decision is made in the face of evidence, not despite it or without\
it.\
\\end\{quote\}\
\
The equations are:\
\\beqn\
\\langle U_\{\\mbox\{jump\}\}\\rangle &=& \\P\{instructor packed\}\\times \\Ug\{instructor packed\}\{jump\} + \\\\\
&& \\P\{Peter packed\}\\times \\Ug\{Peter packed\}\{jump\} \\\\\
\\langle U_\{\\mbox\{don't jump\}\}\\rangle &=& \\P\{instructor packed\}\\times \\Ug\{instructor packed\}\{don't jump\} + \\\\\
&& \\P\{Peter packed\}\\times \\Ug\{Peter packed\}\{don't jump\}\
\\eeqn\
with a possible utility table\
\
\\begin\{tabular\}\{@\{\}lll@\{\}\}\
\\toprule\
 & \\multicolumn\{2\}\{c\}\{\\textbf\{Utility (benefits and costs)\}\}  \\\\ \\midrule\
 & \\multicolumn\{2\}\{c\}\{\{\\em Who packed the parachute?\}\}  \\\\ \
  & \\textit\{Instructor \} & \\textit\{Peter\}\\\\\
\\textit\{jump\} & 100 & -10000   \\\\\
\\textit\{don't jump\} & 0 & 0  \\\\ \\bottomrule\
\\end\{tabular\}\
\\vspace\{.1in\}\
\
For this analysis to work, we would have at least,\
\\bi\
\\i $\\P\{instructor packed\} \\sim 1$: one is nearly certain the instructor packed the parachute\
\\i $\\P\{Peter packed\} \\sim 0$: one is nearly certain that Peter \{\\em didn't\} pack the parachute\
\\i $\\Ug\{instructor packed\}\{jump\}\\gg 1$: good benefit from jumping, with instructor packing the  parachute\
\\i $\\Ug\{Peter packed\}\{jump\}\\ll 0$: large cost  from jumping, with Peter packing the  parachute\
\\i $\\Ug\{Peter packed\}\{don't jump\}=\\Ug\{instructor packed\}\{don't jump\}\\sim 0$: neutral gain for not jumping in either case\
\\ei\
\
\\subsection\{Analyzing the Responses\}\\label\{sec:mcgrewresponse\}\
\
Notice, for McGrew to have ``faith in his instructor'', two things must be true:\
\\be\
\\i $\\P\{instructor packed\} \\sim 1$: one is nearly certain the instructor packed the parachute\
\\i $\\Ug\{instructor packed\}\{jump\}\\gg 1$: good benefit from jumping, with instructor packing the  parachute\
\\ee\
\
McGrew wants to focus on point (2), while Boghossian wants to focus on point (1). Once seen this way, it is very easy to understand the responses.\
\
For example, why don't we say that we have faith in the existence of\
chickens? Because,\
\\beqn\
\\Ug\{chickens exist\}\{action\} \\sim \\Ug\{chickens don't exist\}\{action\}\\sim 0\
\\eeqn\
for all actions - we have nothing at stake, there is no utility, even if  we are confident that chickens exist (i.e. \\(P(\\mbox\{chickens exist\})\\sim 1\\)).\
\
Does McGrew have have faith or evidence that Islam is false?  McGrew claims he has evidence that Islam is false, $\\Pg\{Islam\}\{data\}\\ll 1$, but is not venturing anything on Islam (or more accurately, on his choice to\
not follow Islam), $\\Ug\{not-Islam\}\{action\}\\sim 0$. Again, Boghossian sees the first part (the probabilities), yet ignores the second part (the utilities).\
\
Going back to the exchange, we note, however, that sometimes McGrew is also using Boghossian's definition:\
\
\\bi\
\\i Boghossian: \{\\em ``what do people mean when they accuse someone of having\
`faith in evolution' ''\}?\
\\i McGrew: \{\\em ``You're trusting in something that you cannot completely verify because it doesn't lie open to your senses.''\}\
\\ei\
\
Now I can think of no way to understand this statement from the\
perspective of McGrew's definition:\
\\pquote\{When I act on that belief I am taking some step that places outcomes I care about beyond my direct control.\}\
\
What outcomes are you placing beyond your control believing in\
evolution? What obvious utility are you weighing in this case? As far as\
we can see there is none, and so \{\\em faith\} in this context is in fact being used here as ``belief without sufficient evidence''. \
\
\\subsection\{Priors and Faith\}\\label\{priors-and-faith\}\
\
We think this brings in another aspect of faith, which we believe applies to all of the cases explored so far, and that is that faith is used only in contexts with low \\emph\{prior\} probability. In this conversation,\
they spoke of faith in the context of the supernatural, extreme\
activities (i.e. jumping out of planes), events beyond our immediate\
senses - all of which coincide with lower \\emph\{prior\} probability, and\
need \\emph\{more\} evidence than is typical to overcome them. They may, or\
may not, also have high utility. We don't have faith in the existence of\
chickens because the existence of chickens has high \\emph\{prior\}\
probability.\
\
Because of this, it makes sense that there are those who are not convinced by the evidence for things others have \{\\em faith\} in, because of the necessary quantity and quality to bring a low \{\\em prior\} probability up to a significant \{\\em posterior\} probability.  For those who are convinced by the evidence, it also makes sense that they would then focus on the \{\\em utility\} of the claims.  The problem that arises, however, is a problem with the word \{\\em faith\}.  Since it is referring to two distinct components, the apologist can easily switch between them\
without even noticing it themselves. Again, we put forward the suggestion to discuss things in terms of decision theory and avoid words with multiple meanings.  \
\
\\subsection\{Without Evidence\}\
\
Although a bit shorter and punchier, the term ``belief without evidence'' is misleading, even if you know you are focussing on the probability side of the analysis.  The more honest phrase would be ``belief without \\emph\{sufficient\} evidence''. When people say\
there is no evidence for something (like God, UFOs, astrology, psychic\
phenomena, etc\\ldots\{\}), they really mean that there is terrible\
evidence for something. Even in the case of something so poorly supported as astrology, there is \\emph\{some\} evidence for its claims - the probability is not zero.  It may be very small, but one could imagine evidence in principle that would convince you, which means that the probability is indeed non-zero. The exaggerated, more\
simple, phrase of ``belief without evidence'' is counterproductive,\
especially when the more accurate phrase, ``belief without\
\\emph\{sufficient\} evidence'', is nearly as simple. \
\
}