{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## <$Title>\
\
As part of the ``Root of All Evil'' program, Richard Dawkins conducted many interviews with theists.  One in particular, with theologian Alister McGrath, deals with the notion of faith[@Dawkins:aa].  They start with a discussion about the term \\emph\{faith\}, and McGrath\
says\
\
\\pquote\{\
We're dealing with a different situation than, for example, evidence\
that the moon orbits the earth at a certain distance\
\}\
\
and\
\
\\pquote\{\
There are many possible ways of explaining *the world*, and we have\
to make the very difficult judgement of which is the best of these\
*explanations* $\\ldots$ evidence takes us thus far, but then when it\
comes to deciding between a number of competing explanations, it is\
extremely difficult to make an evidence-driven argument.\
\}\
\
and\
\
\\pquote\{\
I believe faith is rational, in the sense that it tries to make the best\
possible sense of things $\\ldots$ even though we believe this is the best\
possible sense of things, we cannot \\emph\{prove\} this is the\
case $\\ldots$ there is a point where *faith* goes \\emph\{beyond\} the\
evidence\
\}\
\
By this point, the reader should be able to tell that McGrath is employing the \{\\em belief\} part of the expected utility form of \{\\em faith\}.  One wonders in these cases why he doesn't simply talk about evidence, and the weight of\
probabilities? Historians, for example, don't use the word \\emph\{faith\}\
even though they deal with probabilities, some of which are highly\
uncertain. Scientists all the time deal with probabilities, without\
invoking the word \\emph\{faith\} in any paper.\
\
Further, McGrath ignores the fact that there already is a proper and\
rational method to address the ``decision between a number of competing\
explanations'', that \\emph\{doesn't\} go beyond the evidence, and doesn't\
claim more knowledge than is justified. What is this method? It's called\
the mathematics of probability! So, McGrath is claiming there is a\
problem that faith solves, which is not a problem at all, and he is\
using the word faith (at the moment) as synonymous with probability.\
\
Why is he doing this? It seems as if it is because McGrath is holding to\
a double standard, and shifts the definitions of concepts around\
whenever pressed. He doesn't like the notion of believing strongly\
without sufficient evidence (which, as we've seen, is one use of the word faith), so he\
defines it (at the moment) to be equivalent to probabilities.\
\
\\subsection\{Inference to the Best Explanation\}\
\
Then McGrath continues to talk about probabilistic reasoning,\
and says that with faith one is doing \\emph\{inference to the best\
explanation\}, given a number of competing multiple explanations. As we\
stated earlier, if all he means is that faith is probabilistic\
reasoning, then we don't have an argument - except that we think he can make things more clear. We would contend, along with Dawkins, the \\emph\{vast\} majority of people do not take it to mean this - even the notion of \{\\em faith\} as \{\\em trust\} isn't the same as this.\
\
However, we'd like to challenge his basic premise: that in\
dealing with multiple competing explanations that one should try to\
``infer to the best explanation'', and \\emph\{believe strongly in that\
explanation\}. A simple example introduced in Section~\\ref\{sec:atheism_agnosticism\} on page~\\pageref\{sec:atheism_agnosticism\}, suffices to see this. In this example, we have two explanations of the number of stars, one which\
says that there is an \\emph\{even\} number of stars and another that says\
that there is an \\emph\{odd\} number of stars. Pretty much we know that,\
at any given instant, one of these \\emph\{must\} be true. However strong\
belief in either one is completely unwarranted - there is simply no way\
to know. From a probabilistic framework, we express this as\
\
\\begin\{eqnarray*\}\
P(\{\\rm odd\}) &=&0.5 \\\\\
P(\{\\rm even\})&=&0.5\
\\end\{eqnarray*\}\
\
However, it is worse than that. Let's say we had a smidgen of evidence\
toward the even-star model, such that we had:\
\
\\begin\{eqnarray*\}\
P(\{\\rm odd\}) &=&0.499995 \\\\\
P(\{\\rm even\})&=&0.500005\
\\end\{eqnarray*\}\
\
Even though there is a \\emph\{best\} explanation here (\\emph\{even\} is\
slightly more probable than \\emph\{odd\}), and we have the exact\
probabilities, it is \\emph\{still irrational\} to hold strong belief in\
either explanation. One really does have to look where the weight of the\
probabilities lay. Inference to the best explanation fails as a guiding\
principle in the face of uncertainty, and is not well defined in all\
contexts. \
\
What is happening here is that on the face of it, ``inference to the best explanation'' sounds like a great thing - something we should always strive for.  However, when you look at what it \{\\em actually\} means, it falls short unless you are in a situation where the best explanation is also very probable.  Strong belief is only justified when the claim is very probable, not just that is is the most probable amongst a number of (possibly nearly equivalent) alternatives.\
\
\
\\subsection\{Shifting Sands\}\\label\{playing-dodgeball-with-an-apologist\}\
\
One of the benefits of seeing these arguments in the light of the framework of probability is that it makes one sensitive to shifting definitions.  We saw that earlier in Section~\\ref\{sec:mcgrewresponse\} where Tim McGrew changes his usage of the term \{\\em faith\} depending on the response.  Here, McGrath does the same thing.\
\
First it was ``faith is reasonable'', based on evidence, going beyond the evidence to the ``inference to the best explanation'' and that as a result one can have a reasonable faith in God.  Then, when asked about his belief in a creator, and the evidence for it,  despite having difficulty with the implied complexity of such a creator, he says\
\
\\pquote\{\
I want to go back to CS Lewis who says I believe in Christianity as I\
believe the Sun has risen, not simply because I see \\textbf\{it\} by\
\\textbf\{by it\} I see everything else. Belief in God gives you a way of\
seeing the world that makes an awful lot of sense of it.\
\}\
\
When pressed on what this implies, he says that \
\\pquote\{there are many\
  reasons I believe in God and that *origins* is not even the\
  primary one...religion really isn't much about where things came\
  from, about things in the distant past, but really about how things\
  are now. How to live your life, how to be moral, etc\\ldots\{\}\
  \}\
which then becomes \
\\pquote\{the key reason for believing God is Jesus, that\
  there is something *in the Jesus story* that needs explanation.\
\}\
and then, this becomes that it is not really about the life of Jesus, and his historicity, but how he was perceived by his followers - the significance they saw in the life and teaching of Jesus.\
\
Notice how this keeps shifting? At first, it is about belief, and then it is about significance (which one could argue is a kind of utility).  Every time he gets pushed on the\
specific consequences of his statement, he retreats, redefines, and\
redirects the conversation.\
\
He doesn't seem to realize that any explanation, even of things\
currently, entails assumptions that can be tested - perhaps with\
observations about the past. He can't simply say that religion is ``not\
about where things came from'', when they explicitly make statements of\
origins - statements which have been universally discredited. The\
atonement, for example, \\emph\{does\} depend critically on the existence\
of Jesus, the existence the ``Fall'', and a creator of the universe -\
for none of which did McGrath provide evidence. If Jesus didn't exist as\
a real person (or even if he was just an ordinary guy) then it doesn't\
matter that his followers simply \\emph\{believed\} that Jesus was God\
incarnate when determining ones belief in the doctrine of salvation. The\
demonstration of the historicity of the events claimed is\
\\emph\{necessary\} for the doctrinal belief. If you don't have strong\
evidence of the former, then you are not rational to believe strongly in\
the latter - you'd be claiming to know things you could not know.\
\
As a scientist, one takes an idea, and pushes the idea to it furthest\
consequences to see where it breaks, or to see what it depends on.\
McGrath seems to change the topic whenever this is done - he does not seem to want to\
face the very real, specific consequences of his stated beliefs and\
refuses to see the connections between the things that may be\
confirmable (apparent design in the biology and the universe itself,\
historicity of people and events, alleged miracle claims, etc\\ldots\{\})\
and the things that make him feel good, but are unmeasurable (existence\
of heaven, the atonement of sins, etc\\ldots\{\}).\
\
\
}