{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## <$Title>\
\
In his talk, "Life: Creation or Evolution\'94[@Miller:2009aa], Ken Miller makes the point that science should inform\
faith and faith should inform science. He cites Paul Davies, a physicist\
who has an interest in theism, and whose article\
"Taking\
Science on Faith\'94[@davies2007taking] takes the position that science itself is a\
faith-based activity. Ken Miller points out, and one can confirm in Paul\
Davies' article, that there are two tenets in science that are taken on\
faith:\
\
\\begin\{enumerate\}\
\\item\
  the universe is ultimately knowable and understandable\
\\item\
  knowledge is better than ignorance\
\\end\{enumerate\}\
\
These concepts, however, are fundamentally different than faith, or even axioms.  Even here, it is plain that the claims are referring to the *belief* part of faith, and not the *trust* part of faith.  The entire phrase "taken on faith" is a signal to the listener that this is so.\
\
\
The first idea, that the universe is knowable, needs to be a bit more specific: what does it mean to be *knowable*? Prior to 1900, it was\
believed that the pieces of a physical model, such as the force of\
gravity, or the electric and magnetic fields of Maxwell were "real":\
there was one-to-one correspondence between the model components and\
things in the real world. Thus, it was believed, that knowing the model\
you would know nature. After 1900, with the advent of quantum mechanics,\
physical models were evaluated based on their predictive value: those\
models that predicted well were good models. It was not believed that\
there was necessarily a correspondence between the model components and\
the real components in nature. Aspects of the model, such as the wave\
function in quantum mechanics, were not believed to be real but simply useful in making\
predictions. To know the world is to be able to predict what would\
happen.\
\
Let's say we replace "understandable" with "predictable", a\
replacement which we think makes practical sense (how else would you\
determine that you understand something?), and is directly in line with\
modern physical thinking. Doing this, then tenet (1) ceases to be an\
axiom, or something we take without sufficient evidence ("on faith"), but is observable. If the universe\
is unpredictable, then all attempts at making prediction will fail. This\
is not what we observe at all. Surely there are still things that are\
unpredictable, such as the simultaneous value of the position and\
momentum of the electron, or the positions of every molecule of air in\
this room, but even there we can make specific predictions about average\
quantities or the values of other variables of interest. Practically,\
the universe has demonstrated itself to be understandable, on the whole.\
This is not a matter of faith.\
\
The second tenet (2) I would wager is too vague. What does "better"\
mean? Better for whom, or for what? Psychologically, one might argue\
something akin to "ignorance is bliss", and there might be something\
to that. If we define, however, "better" to be higher standard of\
living (longer, healthier, more free life) then knowledge can be argued\
to have a demonstrable benefit over ignorance. The results of science\
has doubled the life expectancy in the past 100 years, and has allowed\
us to live more free and healthy lives.  As Carl Sagan says, science delivers the\
goods. Is there any convincing argument that ignorance is better, or\
that we really can't decide which is better? \
\
There is a danger in using the word *faith* in these contexts.  It can communicate to the unaware that there are things that one should justifiably believe on insufficient evidence - a direct violation of the laws of probability.  It can also imply, for those who take *faith* to mean *trust*, that the scientists using the term are somehow admitting an agency in the universe that they don't intend.  It serves only to propagate sloppy thinking in both the fields of science and religion.\
\
}