{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## <$Title>\
\
Concepts about belief and knowledge arose in the National Science Foundation survey on scientific literacy.  The NSF had decided to change the wording of two questions in the\
survey. The original wording is \
\\pquote\{Human beings, as we know them today,\
developed from earlier species of animals,\} and \\pquote\{The universe began\
with a huge explosion.\}\
\
 The new wording is \\pquote\{\\underline\{According to\
evolutionary theory,\} human beings, as we know them today, developed\
from earlier species of animals"  (emphasis mine)\} and \
\\pquote\{\\underline\{According to astronomers,\}\
the universe began with a huge explosion." (emphasis mine)\}\
\
 It is noted that there will be a transition period with the questions, with half of the surveys containing the new questions and half the old, to determine its effect.\
\
The stated goal for this change, from the NSF, is to separate knowledge\
from belief. You might *believe* that humans are created in their\
present form, 6000 years ago, but the new questions try to ascertain\
whether you know that "evolutionary theory" says something different.\
Is this an important distinction? Is this what we really want to\
measure? Which is more important for a society? What is the difference\
between knowledge and belief in this context?[^It is quite clear that there will be at least one effect for this\
rewording: given that the US falls way behind other countries on science\
literacy, especially with these particular questions, the rewording will\
most likely increase these numbers with no other work done.]\
\
Since beliefs are representations of the world that we hold to be correct for the real world\\ldots\{\}as\
opposed to hopes, which are also representations of the world but not\
ones that we hold to be necessarily correct. Knowledge is, as we have defined, simply that collection\
of beliefs that we hold with such high probability or, in other words,\
with such confidence that we do not significantly doubt them. The belief\
that the sun rises in the east each morning is considered knowledge for\
the reason that we hold it with an extremely high probability. \
\
The NSF defines scientific literacy as\
\\href\{http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind04/c7/c7s2.htm\}\{"knowing basic\
facts and concepts about science and having an understanding of how\
science works."\} Why is literacy important? Again,\
\\href\{http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind04/c7/c7s2.htm\}\{the NSF\}: "It [literacy] is valuable not only in keeping up with important science-related issues, but also in evaluating and assessing the validity of any type of information and participating meaningfully in the political process."\
\
The question we must then ask is, does the new wording measure scientific literacy better than the old wording? To do this, we need to outline the four possible types of people answering the two forms of the questions:\
\
\\begin\{enumerate\}\
\\def\\labelenumi\{\\arabic\{enumi\}.\}\
\\itemsep1pt\\parskip0pt\\parsep0pt\
\\item\
  people who answer "yes" to the old and "yes" to the new\
\\item\
  people who answer "no" to the old and "no" to the new\
\\item\
  people who answer "no" to the old and "yes" to the new\
\\item\
  people who answer "yes" to the old and "no" to the new\
\\end\{enumerate\}\
\
The wording change doesn't change cases 1 and 2, adds case 3 to the\
"yes" category and it introduces the erroneous case 4. The cases can\
be summarized in another way, like\
\
\\begin\{enumerate\}\
\\def\\labelenumi\{\\arabic\{enumi\}.\}\
\\itemsep1pt\\parskip0pt\\parsep0pt\
\\item\
  people who know both that, say, the universe began with a big\
  explosion and that astronomers claim that this is true. This is\
  indicative of scientific literacy.\
\\item\
  people who don't know, or do not believe, that the universe began with\
  a big explosion and that also don't know that astronomers claim that this\
  is true. This is indicative of scientific *illiteracy*.\
\\item\
  people who don't *believe* that the universe began with a big\
  explosion but know that astronomers claim that this is true. (more on\
  this below)\
\\item\
  people who know that the universe began with a big explosion, but do\
  not believe that astronomers claim that this is true. This might at\
  first seem to be a totally unreasonable and marginal case, but we think\
  it is more significant than perhaps is generally appreciated. These\
  people might think that the new wording is a trick question (e.g.~they\
  might think, for example, that *physicists*, as opposed to astronomers, claim\
  that it is true). I've had students answer questions in this way, so\
  it is not quite as uncommon as one might think. These students\
  overthink the problem: they know the fact, but are distracted by the\
  extra complexity of the question, thinking that the test is trying to\
  trick them.\
\\end\{enumerate\}\
\
The only reason these particular questions were modified was because of\
the prevalence of religious belief. How do we know this? We don't see a\
proposal to change "The Earth orbits around the Sun and takes a year to\
do it" to "According to astronomers, the Earth orbits around the Sun\
and takes a year to do it." Why? Because no religion (now) has a stake\
in the answer to that question, and thus have no objection to the claim.\
Of course, if you go back to the days of Copernicus this was a different\
story and people were severely punished for too strongly making such a\
claim. The two questions that are proposed to be changed in this way are\
precisely the two concepts that crop up in every creationist tract, and\
are clearly the two major stumbling blocks for a literalist reading of\
the Bible or the Quran.\
\
\{\\textbf\{Case 3: The Religious Believer\}\}\
\
Aside from the motivation for the change, we can ask the question\
whether it is accomplishing something important anyway. Are these Case 3\
people, who would answer "no" to the old question but "yes" to the\
new question, demonstrating scientific literacy?  No.  What they've confirmed is that they know that some scientists *claim*\
that the universe began with an explosion, but they don't believe it.\
This means that they don't accept either the data, or the methods, or both. If\
the question were about something on the fringes of science, then\
perhaps this is fine, but it isn't the case with these two questions.\
Evolution theory, for example, is as well established as the Round Earth\
theory and the Germ theory of disease. To deny it is to deny all of the\
*independent* work in molecular biology, embryology, ecology,\
etc\\ldots\{\} that supports it. Even though they may know the fact that\
biologists support Evolution theory, they have not demonstrated any\
scientific literacy in terms of "evaluating and assessing the validity\
of any type of information and participating meaningfully in the\
political process." The same can be said of the Big Bang theory, to a\
slightly lesser degree (i.e.~there isn't *quite* the volume of\
completely independent *fields* of study supporting it, as there is\
for Evolution, but the data is nearly incontrovertible anyway). To deny\
either idea is akin to denying the Germ theory of disease.\
\
Imagine someone answering "no" to the question "The world is round"\
but answers "yes" to "According to geographers, the world is round".\
Would they be demonstrating scientific literacy?  The difference between belief, knowledge, and the claims of others is quite apparent in this application.\
\
\
}