{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## <$Title>\
\
Fewer words are as loaded and lead to as much disagreement on definitions as the terms  *atheism* and *agnosticism* do.  In this work, we will define these words in a particular way, which we find the most consistent amongst the many different competing usages.  \
\
* Theism and atheism refer to *belief*\
* To be a *theist* simply means to believe in one, or more, personal gods.  This is in contrast to a *deist* who believes in an impersonal god - a god that, for example, created the universe and then stands back and doesn't interact at all with it.  As a result of this lack of interaction, deist beliefs are untestable - there can't be any consequences to measure a non-interacting god.  Because of this, deist beliefs are not addressed at all in this book.  Typically, we will be addressing the Christian or other monotheist arguments, but occasionally bring in polytheist beliefs as they apply.\
* To be an *atheist* simply means that one does not *believe* in the existence of any gods.  It is a statement of being unconvinced.  It is not a statement of confidence that there is no God, just that the arguments for the existence of God is unconvincing.\
* Gnosticism and agnosticism refers to *knowledge* (which is a subset of belief)\
* *Agnostics*[^Sometimes an agnostic atheist is called a weak-atheist, and a gnostic atheist a strong atheist, but we find these terms a bit too pejorative to use.] believe that they cannot *know* whether there is a God or not, whole *gnostics* claim that *knowledge* can be had for (or against) the existence of God.  Thus, one can be an agnostic theist or agnostic atheist.  Also note, that *knowledge* is being used as described earlier, not as absolute certainty, but extremely high confidence. \
\
\
An analogy can help sort things out.  Say we have two explanations of the number of stars, one that\
says there is an *even* number of stars and another that says\
 there is an *odd* number of stars. Pretty much we know that,\
at any given instant, one of these *must* be true. However, strong\
belief in either one is completely unwarranted - there is simply no way\
to know. From a probabilistic framework, we express this as\
\
\\begin\{eqnarray*\}\
P(\{\\rm odd\}) &=&0.5 \\\\\\\\\
P(\{\\rm even\})&=&0.5\
\\end\{eqnarray*\}\
Anyone making the strong claim that, for example, $P(\{\\rm even\})>0.95$ would have to present compelling evidence.  \
\
* Someone who is an *evenist* (analogous to a *theist*) would be someone convinced by the evidence, and assigns a high probability for $P(\{\\rm even\})$.  \
* Someone who is unconvinced by the evidence, say, an *a-evenist* (analogous to an *a-theist*) could maintain a lower probability for $P(\{\\rm even\})$.  \
* A *gnostic evenist* would have a very high probability for $P(\{\\rm even\})$, while an *agnostic evenist* would have a high, but not very high, probability for $P(\{\\rm even\})$.  \
* Likewise, a *gnostic a-evenist* would have a very low probability for $P(\{\\rm even\})$ (and thus a high $P(\{\\rm odd\})$), whereas an *agnostic a-evenist* would have a low $P(\{\\rm even\})$, and possibly equal to $P(\{\\rm odd\})$.  \
\
Thus, for someone to be unconvinced of a \'93claim\'94 (i.e. "there are an even number of stars") because they find the evidence unconvincing *does not* entail that they have a *belief* in the opposite (i.e. they do not necessarily believe there are an odd number of stars).  This point can't be made enough, because it is an extremely common misunderstanding, typically by Christians about atheists.\
\
Matt Dillahunty clearly defines atheism as a lack of belief, and in a\
court-room analogy says that he finds God "not guilty of existing". In\
court, you find the plaintiff "guilty" or "not guilty", not\
"guilty" or "innocent". The burden of proof lies squarely with the\
prosecution. If they haven't met that burden, then the jury finds the\
plaintiff "not guilty". They may, or may not, believe that the\
plaintiff is innocent. Establishing *innocence* in the crime\
changes the burden of proof to the defendant. The difference here comes\
down to priors, which we can see through some illustrative examples\
mapped to probability.\
\
\\subsection\{Different Data\}\\label\{different-data\}\
\
If we imagine data that might actually affect this prior probability,\
the situation is a bit different. Let's imagine that through the laws of\
physics we could demonstrate that\
\
\\begin\{enumerate\}\
\\def\\labelenumi\{\\arabic\{enumi\}.\}\
\\itemsep1pt\\parskip0pt\\parsep0pt\
\\item\
  stars are nearly always formed in pairs\
\\item\
  single stars are very short-lived\
\\end\{enumerate\}\
\
we may actually have an argument for an even-number of stars in the\
universe. In this case, we have $$\
P(O|\{\\rm data\}) \\ll P(O)\
$$ and thus $$\
P(E|\{\\rm data\}) \\gg P(E)\
$$\
\
Where one belief goes down, the other goes up. For our belief in\
odd-ness to go down our belief in evenness must go up. We no longer\
simply *lack* a belief in odd-ness we also both *believe* in\
even-ness and *believe* in non-odd-ness.\
\
\\subsection\{More than two outcomes\}\\label\{more-than-two-outcomes\}\
\
Something interesting happens when there are more than two outcomes.\
\
$$\
P(H)=P(R)=P(Y)=\\frac\{1\}\{3\}\
$$\
\
Some data that nearly rules out one hypothesis, say \\(R\\), may not speak\
to either other hypothesis directly, so you get the equal redistribution\
like:\
\
\\begin\{eqnarray\}\
\\nonumber P(R)&\\sim& 0 \\\\\\\\ \
\\nonumber P(H)=P(Y)&\\sim& 1/2 \
\\end\{eqnarray\}\
\
or it might be the case that the data leaves unchanged the prior\
probability of one of the hypotheses, raising the probability of the\
other, like\
\
\\begin\{eqnarray\}\
\\nonumber P(R)&\\sim& 0 \\\\\\\\ \
\\nonumber P(H)&\\sim& 1/3 \\\\\\\\\
\\nonumber P(Y)&\\sim& 2/3 \
\\end\{eqnarray\}\
\
Notice that it is possible to reduce the probability of one hypothesis\
(i.e. \\(R\\)) and not effect the probability of a separate hypothesis\
(i.e. \\(H\\)), when there are more than two outcomes. It is also possible\
for the probability of that separate hypothesis (i.e. \\(H\\)) to go up,\
or even go down. In other words, when there are more than one\
hypothesis, presenting evidence for (or against) one hypothesis does not\
always guarantee an adjustment in another hypothesis down (or up).\
\
}