{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## <$Title>\
\
When we speak about probability, we speak about a percentage chance (0%-100%) for something to happen, although we often write the percentage as a decimal number, between 0 and 1.  If the  probability of an event is 0 then it is the same as saying that 
\i you are certain that the event will never happen
\i0 .  If the probability is 1 then *you are certain that it 
\i will
\i0  happen*.  Life is full of uncertainty, so we assign a number somewhere between 0 and 1 to describe our state of knowledge of the certainty of an event. The probability that you will get struck by lightning sometime in your life is $p=0.0002$, or 1 out of 5000. Statistical inference is simply the inference in the presence of uncertainty.  We try to make the best decisions we can, given incomplete information.  \
\
Pierre-Simon Laplace, who first formalized the mathematics of probability, spoke of an agent with perfect knowledge.  This agent, Laplace claimed, would not need probability at all.\
\
>We may regard the present state of the universe as the effect of its\
>past and the cause of its future. An intellect which at a certain moment\
>would know all forces that set nature in motion, and all positions of\
>all items of which nature is composed, if this intellect were also vast\
>enough to submit these data to analysis, it would embrace in a single\
>formula the movements of the greatest bodies of the universe and those\
>of the tiniest atom; for such an intellect nothing would be uncertain\
>and the future just like the past would be present before its eyes.[@laplace1825philosophical]\
\
E.T. Jaynes describes it in much the same way.  He says that we label something \'93random\'94 due to our ignorance of the system not to any intrinsic randomness.  He called this labeling the mind-projection fallacy[@Jaynes2003], where you misattribute the unpredictable behavior of a system as a product of the system itself. A rolled die is following the laws of physics, deterministically, and detailed knowledge of the die, the roll, and the surface should allow you to predict 100% of the time what it will do.  We lack that knowledge, thus the behavior becomes unpredictable. We often then attribute that unpredictable behavior as a ``random die'', as if it were the die that contains the randomness and not our own ignorance.\
\
\
}