{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## <$Title>\
\
Words have meaning, and if we are going to communicate with each other\
we need to make sure to use words as carefully as we can.  Otherwise,\
misunderstandings abound.  It seems very common that a word like\
"faith" is used by different people for different ends, and the\
definition shifts even within an argument.  Take for example, the video by Rich Spear[@Spear:2013aa].  In it, Spear presents a distinction drawn between "faith" and "belief", using an analogy of a roller-coaster - belief in the ride being safe vs trusting it being safe enough to ride on.  Notice that his focus is on trust, and thus on *action*.  \
\
It is clear that one must *at least* believe the ride is safe as a prerequisite for trusting it. Since when we say we believe *strongly* in a proposition $A$ when $P(A)>0.95$ (or some other, somewhat arbitrary, high number), we can map this prerequisite to something like the following\
\\beqn\
\\P\{safe\} = 0.99 \\\\\
\\P\{unsafe\} = 0.01\
\\eeqn\
\
Once you believe it is safe, do you trust it to ride?  This brings in decision theory, where we mix probabilities with utility measures. You could believe it to be safe at the $\\P\{safe\} = 0.99$ level, but still not trust it "with your life" because of the *cost* associated with being wrong.  A utility table might look like\
\
\\begin\{tabular\}\{@\{\}lll@\{\}\}\
\\toprule\
 & \\multicolumn\{2\}\{c\}\{\\textbf\{Utility (benefits and costs)\}\}  \\\\ \\midrule\
 & \\textit\{safe\} & \\textit\{unsafe\}\\\\\
\\textit\{ride\} & 10 & -1000   \\\\\
\\textit\{don't ride\} & 0 & 0  \\\\ \\bottomrule\
\\end\{tabular\}\
\\vspace\{.1in\}\
\
Calculating the average utility for each action we get\
\\beqn\
\\langle U_\{\\mbox\{ride\}\}\\rangle &=& 0.99 \\times 10 + 0.01\\times (-1000) = -0.1 \\\\\
\\langle U_\{\\mbox\{don't ride\}\}\\rangle &=& 0.99 \\times 0 + 0.01\\times 0 = 0 \
\\eeqn\
so it is better not to ride.\
\
As a result, *trust* requires both belief and a sufficiently positive net utility. Placed in these terms it is much more clear how the argument is set up.\
\
\\begin\{itemize\}\
\\itemsep1pt\\parskip0pt\\parsep0pt\
\\item\
  when the Spear says that "faith" is like "trust", he is\
  already approaching the problem with strong belief, and is assessing\
  utility - and he rightly claims that belief is not enough.\
\\item\
  when the atheists say that "faith" is "belief without evidence",\
  they are addressing the strength of the evidence to obtain strong\
  belief in the first place - and claiming that the evidence is not sufficient.\
\\item\
  when the Spear and others say that "faith is rational" they are either talking about utility, not belief, or they are claiming that the\
  evidence is in fact good enough for strong belief, and then\
  consequently high utility.\
\\end\{itemize\}\
\
In all cases, it seems as if for the religious, utility and belief are\
muddled when using the word "faith".  For the atheist, "faith" is\
always first and foremost about belief, because even the usage involving trust has belief as a prerequisite.  Perhaps if we frame the problem in terms of belief (probability) and utility we can clear up the fog surrounding discussions of the term *faith*.\
\
}