{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## <$Title>\
\
It may be helpful to start with the dictionary definition, and then follow with a number of statements about *faith* to see where the common usages fall.\
    \
* faith (noun)[@MerriamWebster2009]\
    * strong belief or trust in someone or something\
    * belief in the existence of God\
    * strong religious feelings or beliefs\
    * a system of religious beliefs\
* Now faith is confidence in what we hope for and assurance about what we do not see. [^Hebrews 11:1, New International Version]\
* Faith is trusting in, holding to, and acting on what one has\
good reason to believe is true in the face of difficulties. The\
difficulties may be where you have to take an action where the outcome\
is beyond your control. (Tim McGrew)[Brierley:2014aa]\
* Belief without evidence.  Pretending to know things you do not know. (Peter Boghossian)[@Brierley:2014aa]\
* One of the things that becomes apparent in serious Christian literature is that no one uses 'faith' in the sense of *believing things without reasons*. That might be Richard Dawkins' preferred definition - except when he was publicly asked by Oxford's Professor John Lennox whether he had 'faith' in his lovely wife - but it is important to know that in theology 'faith' always means *personal trust* in the God whose existence one accepts on other grounds. I think God is real for philosophical, historical, and experiential reasons. Only on the basis of my reasoned conviction can I then *trust* God - have faith in him - in the sense meant in theology.[http://mobile.abc.net.au/news/2014-04-18/dickson-tips-for-atheists/5397892][empasis in original]\
* Faith is the excuse people give when they believe something and don't have a good reason. When you believe something and have a good reason, then you give the reason. And in every other instance, you offer something that is faith. - Matt Dillahunty\
\
From these few definitions, we can already see a few things.  First, people use the term in different ways, at different times, so it will be critical that we tack down a particular definition.  It is also critical to recognize which definition someone is using, so we don't inadvertently straw-man their argument.  Second, the two primary components that seem to make up all definitions of faith are *belief* and *trust*.  Faith seems to not be a synonym of either, but a particular combination of them with some restrictions - not all beliefs or acts of trust require faith.\
\
\\subsection\{Belief, Trust, and Faith\}\
\
We have already seen that *belief* is represented mathematically by *probability*, so where *faith* requires belief we will employ probabilities.  *Trust*[@MerriamWebster2009] is "belief that someone or something is reliable, good, honest, effective, etc." So it would seem that trust is a subset of belief, like knowledge is a subset, pertaining specifically to the reliability or goodness of the thing believed. \
\
Faith, however, seems to go a bit further than trust and involve *action* or the willingness to act.  When asked by Peter Boghossian, *"why don't we say that we have faith in the existence of chickens?"*, Tim McGrew replies, \
\\pquote\{We are venturing nothing on the existence of chickens. When I believe\
that chickens exist and I act on that belief I am not taking any step\
that places outcomes I care about beyond my direct control. [In the\
case of religion], people are placing the outcome of their eternal\
soul out of their control. They are taking a risk where the outcomes\
matter. The decision itself is evidenced but the outcome is\
uncertain.\}\
\
\\subsection\{Utility - Probability and Action\}\
\
Probability relates to belief, a measure of state of knowledge about a claim or set of claims.  We can use the mathematics of probability to determine the most likely claim, and use it to inform our actions, but it isn't enough to truly determine the best course of action.  For that, we need to extend the mathematics to include the notion of *utility*, an extension commonly referred to as *decision theory*.  Because faith seems to involve action or potential actions, it to will need to be formulated in this way.  \
\
Decision theory uses the idea of expected value to aid in making decisions, defined as[@Wikipedia:2015aa]\
\\begin\{quote\}\
The idea of expected value is that, when faced with a number of actions, each of which could give rise to more than one possible outcome with different probabilities, the rational procedure is to identify all\
possible outcomes, determine their values (positive or negative) and the\
probabilities that will result from each course of action, and multiply\
the two to give an expected value. The action to be chosen should be the\
one that gives rise to the highest total expected value.\
\\end\{quote\}\
\
The utility values, costs and benefits, could be written in monetary terms, but need not.  One needs only to have a scale to represent how good or bad an outcome is.  The total expected value, also called the  average utility, is just the sum of the individual costs and benefits associated with possible outcomes, weighted by their probability - more likely outcomes are weighted more than less likely ones.  An example will help.\
\
The example here is called the "farmer's dilemma\'94[@jordaan2005decisions], concerns a farmer who can plant one of three crops (labeled $A, B, $ and $C$) with the possibility of three different environments out of the farmer's control, *perfect weather*, *fair weather*, and *bad weather*.  Each of the three crops fare differently in different weather, and thus provide different costs and benefits to the farmer depending on the environment.  Crop $A$, for example, does very well in good weather but very badly in bad, whereas crop $C$ doesn't do as well but is more consistent, with crop $B$ in between.  This can be summarized by the following table of utilities showing benefits (positive) and costs (negative) for each possible combination:\
\
\\begin\{tabular\}\{@\{\}llll@\{\}\}\
\\toprule\
 & \\multicolumn\{3\}\{c\}\{\\textbf\{Utility (benefits and costs)\}\}   \\\\ \\midrule\
 & \\textit\{perfect weather\} & \\textit\{fair weather\} & \\textit\{bad weather\}   \\\\\
\\textit\{plant crop $A$\} & 11 & 1 & -3  \\\\\
\\textit\{plant crop $B$\} & 7 & 5 & 0  \\\\\
\\textit\{plant crop $C$\} & 2 & 2 & 2   \\\\ \\bottomrule\
\\end\{tabular\}\
\\vspace\{.1in\}\
\
Any decision the farmer makes must include the probabilities (his state of knowledge) of the weather environments.  At the extremes, it is easy to see this.  If perfect weather is nearly guaranteed, for example, then planting crop $A$ is of course the best option, whereas if bad weather is guaranteed, then planting crop $C$ is the best.  How does one handle the decision away from the extremes?  This is done by asking, what is the average utility (benefit or cost) for each action, and then choosing the action which maximizes this.  Imagine that the farmer consults a meteorologist, and they determine the following probabilities for the weather environment[^It is possible in some cases that the environmental state also depends on the actions taken.  This is easy to add to this framework, but makes this particular example needlessly complex.]\
\\beqn\
\\P\{perfect weather\}&=&0.1 \\\\\
\\P\{fair weather\}&=&0.5 \\\\\
\\P\{bad weather\}&=&0.4 \\\\\
\\eeqn\
\
The average utility[^Average, or expected, value of a variable $U$ is denoted with angle brackets, $\\langle U \\rangle$] for each action is simply the sum of the probabilities of each environment times the utility for that environment given the action, such as\
\\beqn\
\\langle U_A \\rangle &=& \\P\{perfect weather\}\\times \{\\rm U\}(\\mbox\{perfect weather\}|\\mbox\{plant crop $A$\}) + \\\\\
&& \\P\{fair weather\}\\times \{\\rm U\}(\\mbox\{fair weather\}|\\mbox\{plant crop $A$\}) + \\\\\
&& \\P\{fair weather\}\\times \{\\rm U\}(\\mbox\{bad weather\}|\\mbox\{plant crop $A$\}) \\\\\
&=& 0.1 \\times 11 + 0.5 \\times 1 + 0.4\\times (-3) = 0.4\
\\eeqn\
Performing the same calculation for all of the actions yields,\
\\beqn\
\\langle U_A \\rangle &=& 0.1 \\times 11 + 0.5 \\times 1 + 0.4\\times (-3) = 0.4 \\\\\
\\langle U_B \\rangle &=& 0.1 \\times 7 + 0.5 \\times 5 + 0.4\\times 0 = 3.2 \\\\\
\\langle U_C \\rangle &=& 0.1 \\times 2 + 0.5 \\times 2 + 0.4\\times 2 = 2.0\
\\eeqn\
\
and the best action would be planting crop $B$, because it has the highest expected utility.\
\
The primary point about this process that is relevant to our discussion of faith is that the process involves two separate entities - the probability of various states and the value those states are to us given our actions.  This maps directly to the concepts of *belief* and *trust*, respectively.  One can focus on each one individually, but it is the combination that is important.  \
\
Although there are cases where the average utility is a bad guide, it is a very useful framework to structure a problem.  It should be noted that *utility* does not need to be restricted to money, but can include things like comfort and discomfort.  For example, someone could be *risk averse*, which means that they put a utility on some psychological comfort at the expense of some monetary loss.  Thus the utility value would combine both.  \
\
}