{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 #### Rule 2 (Negation rule):\
\
$$P(A) + P(\{\\rm\\bf not\}\\, A) = 1$$\
In other words, either a statement is true or its negation is true.\
<!--\
\\beqn\
H&\\equiv&\\left\\\{\\parbox\{1.5in\}\{\'93you will get struck by lightning sometime in your life\'94\}\\right. \\\\\
P(H)+P(\{\\rm\\bf not\}\\, H)&=&1\
\\eeqn\
-->\
means that you can be 
\i certain
\i0  that either you will be struck by lightning in your life or you won't.  This seems rather obvious, and you may be wondering why we even bring it up, but it becomes a source of one of the most common logical fallacies - the either-or fallacy. \
\
Notice how this occurs.  The following is correct logical inference:\
<!--\
\\beqn\
B&\\equiv&\\left\\\{\\parbox\{1.5in\}\{\'93a playing card drawn from a deck is black\'94\}\\right. \\\\\
P(B)+P(\{\\rm\\bf not\}\\, B)&=&1\
\\eeqn\
-->\
means that, if you draw a playing card from a deck, you can be *certain* that it is either black or it is not-black.  This is true no matter what kind of deck of cards you are dealing with.  The following, however, is not correct logical inference:\
<!--\
\\beqn\
B&\\equiv&\\left\\\{\\parbox\{1.5in\}\{``a playing card drawn from a deck is black''\}\\right. \\\\\
R&\\equiv&\\left\\\{\\parbox\{1.5in\}\{``a playing card drawn from a deck is red''\}\\right. \\\\\
P(B)+P(R)&=&1 \\leftarrow\\mbox\{\\underline\{\\em this is incorrect\}\}\
\\eeqn\
-->\
The key point here is that \'93not-black\'94 is not the same as \'93red\'94, except in those cases where you can be certain that there are only those two possibilities.  One has to be on the lookout for hidden possibilities - perhaps one has a *Five Crowns* deck which has green and yellow cards as well.  Failure of imagination can easily lead to accidental either-or logical failures[^christianeitheror].\
\
[^christianeitheror]: An example seen later is an argument by a Christian examining the probability of theism ($T$) being true or atheism ($A$) being true.  The argument hinges on $P(T)+P(A)=1$, and trying to reduce $P(A)$ to win the argument.  However, the proposition \'93theism is true\'94 masks as many alternatives as \'93not-black\'94 in the example here.  One could have the Christian God, the Greek pantheon, the Cthulhu mythological structure, etc... and thus the argument does not perform what the Christian thinks it does.\
\
}