{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### <$Title>\
\
\
What is knowledge?  Plato gave the following definition of knowledge:\
\
> Knowledge is justified true belief.[@fine2003plato]\
\
This is an unsatisfying definition because, it seems, in\
order to justifiably label anything as *knowledge* with this\
definition we'd need to be able to independently determine that the\
proposition is true. This presupposes that there is some \'93outside\'94\
knowledge, which we feel comes too close to assuming a religious\
justification at the outset.  We believe there is likely to be a truth to be known, but that we can never truly know what it is for certain - but this is not a problem. It is a red herring to bring up 100% certainty for knowledge, because it is never achievable, and isn't what we practically call knowledge[^knowledgebelief]. We prefer a definition inspired by Stephen J Gould:\
\
[^knowledgebelief]: In this way, knowledge is a subset of belief.\
\
>In science, \'91fact\'92 can only mean `confirmed to such a degree that it\
>would be perverse to withhold provisional assent.\'92 I suppose that apples\
>might start to rise tomorrow, but the possibility does not merit equal\
>time in physics classrooms.[@gould1981evolution]\
\
\
Where it says \'93fact\'94, read \'93knowledge\'94.  Where it says \'93science\'94\
read \'93life\'94.  The fact, or knowledge, that the Sun rises in the east and sets in \
the west is not due to a formal *proof* that this is always true, or will \
continue indefinitely into the future.  It is an admission that the probability is so \
outrageously high, given the evidence of every other sun rise and sun set observed, \
and the further confirmation of models of the solar system, that it would be \'93perverse to withhold provisional assent\'94.  We accept the claim as a practical matter, despite not being 100\\% certain, because of the overwhelming probabilities.  This we call knowledge.  It is thus never a problem to admit lack of certainty in knowledge, and it can be seen as an obvious diversion if anyone tries to argue in a manner that suggests it's a problem.\
\
Mathematically, we might write[^approxnotation] it as $P(A)>0.9999 \\approx 1$.  Notice that we don't need 100% certainty to claim knowledge, and that it is possible for the \'93knowledge\'94 to be wrong (although, by definition, it is highly unlikely for this to be the case).  \
\
[^approxnotation]: $P(A)\\approx 1$ means that the probability of $A$ is *approximately* equal to 1\
\
We can ask the question, how did we come to this knowledge?  The answer is simply, by applying the rules of probability!  According to Bayes' rule, we update our probabilities given the evidence.  This can lead us to approach, but never equal, probability of 1.  We can approach, but never achieve, complete certainty of any claim.  Rationality only insists that we apply the rules of probability systematically. \
}