{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### <$Title>\
\
### Proof\
\
Do *proof* and *evidence* mean the same thing?  No, they don't. To summarize, proof refers specifically to the result of a *deductive* process.  In this process, one starts with some (given) axioms, and can demonstrate *with certainty* (i.e. prove) a number of theorems (i.e direct consequences) from those axioms.  Thus, the word proof should only be used in situations involving *certainty*, or in other words, probabilities of exactly 1 or exactly 0 only.\
\
Evidence, however, factors into inference through an *inductive* process, not *deductive*.  Induction is just another name for the application of the rules of probability, so we have been doing that from the beginning of the book.  Deduction is just another name for formal logic, where the probabilities are restricted to values of 0 or 1 only.  As a result, we have the following maxim,\
\
\
> *Proof* does not exist in science, only in math and philosophy.\
\
The only place you can have proof is where you have *axioms*\
(i.e. unprovable assertions), and can then *prove* a number of\
consequences of those axioms. We can prove, for example, that the sum of\
the angles of a triangle is 180 degrees, if we start with the Euclidean\
axioms of geometry. Science doesn't have axioms, and thus there are no\
proofs - there is only evidence. We sometimes hear the term \'93proven\
scientifically\'94, even from people who should know better\\footnote\{An example of someone who should know better is Richard\
Carrier in his [\'93Is Philosophy Stupid\'94 talk]({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YLvWz9GQ3PQ"}}{\fldrslt http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YLvWz9GQ3PQ}}), his [books]({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.amazon.com/Proving-History-Bayess-Theorem-Historical/dp/1616145595"}}{\fldrslt http://www.amazon.com/Proving-History-Bayess-Theorem-Historical/dp/1616145595}})\
and his [articles]({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://infidels.org/library/modern/richard_carrier/theory.html"}}{\fldrslt http://infidels.org/library/modern/richard_carrier/theory.html}}).\
\
Another way of putting it is that probability theory contains deductive logic as a special case.  As it applies to science, it has the following consequence\
\
> All of the evidence in the universe cannot bring the probability of a scientific claim to certainty.\
\
To see this directly, imagine we have two (and only two) hypotheses for\
the Earth - flat earth and round earth. We can write Bayes' rule for the\
probability of each given the data. Note that this data includes things\
like the experience of airplane flight, Magellan's trip, pictures from\
space - all of which could be faked! The flat earth hypothesis is not\
*logically* impossible, it's just been overwhelmed by the evidence.\
\
\\begin\{eqnarray*\}\
P(\{\\rm round\}|\{\\rm data\}) &=& \\frac\{P(\{\\rm data\}|\{\\rm round\})P(\{\\rm round\})\}\{P(\{\\rm data\}|\{\\rm flat\})P(\{\\rm flat\})+P(\{\\rm data\}|\{\\rm round\})P(\{\\rm round\})\}\\\\\\\\\
P(\{\\rm flat\}|\{\\rm data\}) &=& \\frac\{P(\{\\rm data\}|\{\\rm flat\})P(\{\\rm flat\})\}\{P(\{\\rm data\}|\{\\rm flat\})P(\{\\rm flat\})+P(\{\\rm data\}|\{\\rm round\})P(\{\\rm round\})\} \
\\end\{eqnarray*\}\
\
Notice that, no matter how well the round earth hypothesis explains the\
data, $$P(\{\\rm data\}|\{\\rm round\})\\approx 1$$ and how unlikely you\
believe it is that the Earth is flat even *before* the data,\
$$P(\{\\rm flat\})\\ll 1$$ as long as there is some *possible* (even if\
seriously contrived) way to explain the data with the flat earth\
hypothesis, $$P(\{\\rm data\}|\{\\rm flat\}) \\neq 0$$ it is\
*mathematically impossible* to make the round earth hypothesis\
certain, $$P(\{\\rm round\}|\{\\rm data\})< 1$$\
\
On the right-hand side of Bayes' Rule, the closer the round-earth terms\
and the flat-earth terms get to 1 and 0, respectively, the closer the\
left-hand terms get to 1 and 0, but they never *equal* 1 and 0.\
This does not mean that we can't be *confident* of claims, only\
that we cannot have *absolute certainty of anything* in science\
(and therefore, in life in general). Anyone who doesn't understand that\
does not understand science.\
\
For it to be *reasonable to believe in something*, it must rise to a level of probability that you would label it as *belief*.  Does this ever happen, or should this ever happen, with untrue things?  Certainly.  Here are a few that come to mind.\
\
1. the world is flat - as long as you are constrained to not live near the shore, or see a lunar eclipse\
2. life is designed - before the advent of Darwin's theory of natural selection\
3. the Sun, and the stars, all go around the Earth - until the advent of physics\
\
In each of these cases there is in fact strong evidence for the claims, and against the counter claims, to make it reasonable to believe them (at the time).  It is no longer reasonable to believe these claims - the process of reason forces one to adjust the probabilities of the hypotheses given new evidence, and to discard those hypotheses that become too improbable.\
\
\
}