{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0  His argument is summarized here.  He defines a number of propositions, the chapter references are to his book [@swinburne2003resurrection].\
\
* $t$: theism is true - there is a God (of the traditional kind)\
* $k$: background knowledge of natural theology\
* $P(t|k)$: probability there is a God (of the traditional kind) given the background knowledge of natural theology.  He suggests (from Chapter 1) a ``modest'' value of $P(t|k) = 1/2$.  We\'92ll return to this later.\
* $c$: the claim God became incarnate at some time\
* $P(c|t,k)$: probability that ``God became incarnate at some time'' given that ``there is a God (of the traditional kind)'' and ``the background knowledge of natural theology''  Again, from (Chapter 2) he suggests a ``modest'' value of $P(c|t,k) = 1/2$.\
* $P(c|k)$: probability that ``some God became incarnate at some time'' given ``the background knowledge of natural theology''.  Mathematically it is related to the other terms as\
$$\
P(c|k)= P(c|t,k) \\times P(t|k) = 1/2\\times 1/2 = 1/4\
$$\
* $e$: historical evidence, broken up into\
    * $e_\{1\}$: evidence of the life of Jesus (Part II)\
    * $e_\{2\}$: evidence of the detailed history of the Resurrection (Part III)\
    * $e_\{3\}$: evidence that Jesus satisfies the requirements for divine incarnation more than other prophets (Chapter 3)\
* $f$: claims that the evidence of the strength given by $e$ (also broken up into $f_\{1\}$, $f_\{2\}$, and $f_\{3\}$\
* $P(c|f,k)$: the probability of the incarnate God, given the evidence.  This is the term that Swinburne is ultimately interested in.  His final result is\
$$\
P(c|f,k) = \\frac\{100\}\{103\} = 0.97\
$$\
We'll see how he gets there as we continue.\
* $P(f|c,k)$: the probability that, if God became incarnate, we would have the evidence we have.  Swinburne suggests the ``fairly low'' number of $P(f|c,k) = 1/10$\
\
Now all we need do is apply the rules of probability from these estimates, and we obtain Swinburnes answer of 97% probability that God became incarnate in Jesus given the evidence,\
\\beqn\
P(c|f,k) &=& \\frac\{P(f|c,k) P(c|k)\}\{P(f|k)\}\\\\\
P(c|f,k) &=& \\frac\{P(f|c,k) P(c|k)\}\{P(f|c,k) P(c|k) + P(f|\\sim(c,k)) P(\\sim c|k)\}\\\\\
&=& \\frac\{\\frac\{1\}\{10\}\\times \\frac\{1\}\{4\}\}\{\\frac\{1\}\{40\} + \\left(\\frac\{3\}\{4\}\\times\\frac\{1\}\{1000\}\\right)\} \\\\\
&=& 0.97\
\\eeqn\
\
In his book on the existence of God, Swinburne provides a series of pieces of evidence, denoted $e_\{n\}$, where $P(e_\{n\}|h,k)>P(e_\{n\}|k)$ or the evidence is more likely with theism than in just the background.  He does, however, state that added assumptions to $h$ must be added to account for some pieces of evidence of evil that are less likely under, what he calls, ``bare theism''.  \
\
> The fact that the [evidence of] evil required additional hypotheses to be added to the hypothesis of theism to save it from disconfirmation meant that the evil lowered the probability of theism as such (bare theism) from its probability on the evidence taken into account previously. The fact of divine hiddenness did not, however, count against the existence of God.\
\
Swinburne's calculation follows Bayes' rule\
\
\\beqn\
P(h|e,k) &=& \\frac\{P(e|h,k)P(h|k)\}\{P(e|h,k)P(h|k)+P(e|\\sim h,k)P(\\sim h|k)\}\
\\eeqn\
\
> Let us turn now to $h_\{2\}$. This is the hypothesis that there is no god or gods, but an initial or everlasting physical state of the universe, different from the present state but such as to bring about the present state. But there is no particular reason why an unextended physical point or any of the other possible starting points of the universe, or an everlasting extended universe, should as such have the power and liability to bring about all the features that I have described.\
\
* $e_1$ be \'93there is a physical universe?\'94\
* second argument, from $e_2$ (which will be the conformity of the universe to temporal order) i.e. subject to temporal order\
*  $e_3$, etc.. consciousness, morality\
\
No physical model here, just words.\
\
> Now I suggest that a universe without connections between universals would be simpler than one with connections; and one with simpler patterns of connection would be simpler than one with such complicated patterns of connection that rational beings would not be able to infer the future behavior of objects by means of the simplest extrapolation from their past behavior. Among theories of the universe as a whole (which will thus have equal scope), simplicity is the sole indicator of intrinsic probability. It then follows that, if we give it the weight that I have urged that we should (so that a very simple theory is more probable than a disjunction of many more complex theories), it would be very probable that there would be no connections between universals at all?that the universe would be chaotic....Either way, it is going to be improbable that in a Godless universe there will be simple connections between universals, and so simple laws of nature.\
\
> The arguments of the previous pages have sought to show just this; and indeed that the probability of order of the right kind is very much greater if there is a God, and so that the existence of such order adds greatly to the probability that there is a God.\
\
\
> If only a very narrow range of laws and initial conditions allow such evolution, then we may say that the universe is \'93fine-tuned\'94 for this evolution.\
\
>There remains, however, a consensus among physicists that the values of the constants in the laws of standard theory (as opposed to the variables of initial conditions) must lie within very narrow ranges if life is to evolve anywhere in the universe?ranges that include the actual values of the constants and probably a few other small ranges in which the values of several of the constants are different from their actual ones.\
\
> But the considerable a priori weight of simplicity suggests that in a Godless universe it is a priori improbable that any one universe will be tuned so as to yield human bodies. With $e$ as the existence of human bodies, $h$ as theism, and $k$ as the evidence of a universe conforming to natural laws, $P(e|\\sim h,k)$ is very low.\
\
> The laws of Relativity Theory and Quantum Theory, integrated perhaps into a *
\i Grand Unified Theory*
\i0  or *
\i Theory of Everything*
\i0  by which everything physical might be explained (fully or partially, even if not completely), give not the slightest reason to suppose that some brain state would cause a green sensation or a sensed smell of coffee.\
\
>If, when I tried to move my foot, my hand moved instead, predators would soon overtake me. But this correct explanation of why (given that intentions cause brain events) the brain is connected by nerves to the rest of the body in the way it is does not explain why we have intentions to move our bodies at all and why they cause brain events, which is a quite different problem. I conclude that the existence of the most novel and striking features of animals and above all of humans (their conscious life of feeling, choice, and reason, causing connected to their bodies) seems to lie utterly beyond the range of successful scientific explanation.\
\
How is this possible?  \
\
>I argued in Chapter 6 that there was a significant probability to which I gave the somewhat artificial value of 1/2 that a God would create humanly free agents?that is, beings who could choose how to make important differences to themselves, each other, and the world.\
\
\
>I have been arguing that, by permitting moral evil and bringing about natural evil, God gives us (and animals) a good that he could not give us in any other morally permissible way.\
\
>Hence evil provides a good C-inductive argument against the existence of God. But it does not provide a very strong one, for the reason that providing life after death for many humans (not merely those who need compensation) and becoming incarnate to share their suffering are the kinds of act that a good God might well do anyway? for they are good acts (and perhaps good acts of different kinds from the other acts of God that we have been discussing, and maybe even acts of best kinds), whether or not required in order for God justifiably to allow the amount of evil that occurs. (See p. 231 for the goodness of an act of the former kind, and pp. 288-90 for additional reasons that God might have for becoming incarnate.) So, with e as the occurrence of the moral and natural evils known to us, h as the hypothesis of theism, and k as the evidence considered in previous chapters, $P(h|e , k) < P(h|k)$, but the former is not less than the latter by very much.\
\
Argument from divine hiddenness\
\
>But, if the good desire is stronger than the bad one and I have a deep awareness of the presence of God (that is, such that God?s existence is not open to question), then the balance of inclination will be to the good and there will be no free choice between good and bad. We will be in the situation of the child in the nursery who knows that mother is looking in at the door, and for whom, in view of the child?s desire for mother\'92s approval, the temptation to wrongdoing is simply overborne. We need \'91epistemic distance\'92 from God in order to have a free choice between good and evil.\
\
Miracles\
\
But although God has reason for bringing these things about, he also has reason for not bringing them about or not bringing them about too automatically in response to human needs....The major such reason is that it is good that humans should decide for themselves whether to warn or convert others, that humans should have some responsibility for the (immediate or long-term) spiritual destiny of their fellows. \
\
>My conclusion to this section is that, in so far as we have historical evidence (normally in the form of testimony) to the occurrence of an event E that is such that, if it occurred, it would probably be a violation of natural laws and that is of a kind that there is some probability that a God would have reason to bring about, that makes it more probable than it would otherwise be that there is a God. For a God would be expected occasionally to bring about such events. Yet, if there is no God, there is no significant probability that such events will occur. Evidence that an event is of this kind is evidence that it is an event ?too odd? for science to explain. Hence, with k as the evidence discussed in previous chapters, and e as evidence of testimony of the above kind, and h the hypothesis of theism, $P(h|e , k) > P(h|k)$. It will depend on the strength of the testimony, by how much $P(h|e , k)$ exceeds $P(h|k)$.\
\
>God may answer the prayers of members of all religions. And many doctrines of one religion are compatible with doctrines of another religion. Christianity incorp- orates most of Judaism, and is certainly happy to recognize the occurrence of its foundation miracles. But there are cases of conflict, and for those cases Hume?s point is correct. It follows that that religion (if any) which has the best authenticated miracles has the best evidence from this source in its support.\
\
\
>In discussing religious experience philosophers have sometimes made the claim that an experience is evidence for nothing beyond itself, and that therefore religious experience has no evidential value. That remark reflects a philosophical attitude that those philosophers would not adopt when discussing experiences of any other kind. Quite obviously having the experience of it seeming (epistemically) to you that there is a table there (that is, your seeming to see a table) is good evidence for supposing that there is a table there. Having the experience of its seeming (epistemically) to you that I am here giving a lecture (that is, your seeming to hear me give a lecture) is good evidence for supposing that I am here lecturing. So generally, contrary to the original philosophical claim, I suggest that it is a principle of rationality that (in the absence of special considerations), if it seems (epistemically) to a subject that x is present (and has some characteristic), then probably x is present (and has that characteristic); what one seems to perceive is probably so. And similarly I suggest that (in the absence of special considerations) apparent memory is to be trusted. If it seems to a subject that in the past he perceived something or did something, then (in the absence of special considerations) probably he did. How things seem to be (in contingent respects),9 that is how we seem to perceive them, experience them, or remember them are good grounds for a belief about how things are or were. \
\
>From this it would follow that, in the absence of special considerations, all religious experiences ought to be taken by their subjects as genuine, and hence as substantial grounds for belief in the existence of their apparent object?God, or Mary, or Ultimate Reality, or Poseidon.\
\
}